Over several decades, the measurement of Gross Domestic Product has become the primary way by which we try to tell whether the economy is moving in the right direction.
An increase in GDP is taken to show that things are going well, while any decrease is regarded with anxiety.
It’s not an unreasonable assumption.
We intuitively understand that GDP gives a rough measure of a flourishing economy.
The countries with the highest GDP per capita – Norway, Switzerland, Australia, Denmark, Sweden and Canada – are also pretty successful in many other ways.
They are, for instance, all very close to the top of the Human Development Index, which assesses life expectancy and levels of education.
In line, though, with the basic neutrality of Classical Economics, GDP only measures how much financial activity there is.
It does not concern itself with how good this activity is, from the point of view of human flourishing.
If a nation became obsessed with buying lottery tickets or ringed its coastline with grim apartment blocks, GDP would certainly rise, but not in ways that would constitute progress towards a more flourishing society.
GDP is not irrelevant to the good society.
But it is a very imperfect guide.
The ultimate goal of work and money – trade, buying and selling, manufacture, enterprise, corporate activity, financial investment: the whole array of activity which is currently designated Capitalism – should be human flourishing.
That is, an economy geared to flourishing and meeting our highest private and public needs.
Good Economics – developed by The School of Life – is the study of the quality of commercial activity, not just the quantity.It aims to track how well (or badly) our actual economy is serving its ultimate purpose.
To what extent is it aligned to its true goal? In what ways are we making progress? It’s not so much that we need to measure overall levels of happiness (though that’s not a bad idea at all).
We need some more morally focused economic dials.
There are many determinants of happiness which are not closely tied to the economy, like whether we make good decisions about relationships, how forgiving we are, whether we appreciate nature, how we cope with our mortality.
There are many areas of wisdom that contribute to the well-lived life and to collective happiness and they all need attention.
But we should here consider the economy in a more closely focused way and ask to what extent it is in itself addressing its purpose as an agent of human flourishing.
We’re not suggesting that societies should stop keeping track of their overall level of economic activity.
Instead, we want to add some extra dials to the dashboard that tell us more about the quality of that economic activity.
Typically, motivation is seen as linked to levels of pay.
Pay more – the theory goes – and you get great devotion from your employees.
But this isn’t quite right.
The highest levels of motive –which can be truly extraordinary – arise when people understand that they are serving a genuinely good purpose.
Their own role may be modest, but they bring their best efforts to the job because they are proud to be doing it – because of what it is they do, rather than simply because of how much they get paid.